design explanations (#451)
CDCgov/RecordLinker: docs/site/schema-design.md

# Schema Design

This document outlines the database schema supporting the **Master Patient Index (MPI)** system. It describes the primary data models used to perform record linking via the configurable algorithm.

---

## Overview of Key Models

### 1. **Person**

The `Person` model represents a unique individual within the MPI system. It serves solely as an identifier, linking a cluster of patient records without asserting any canonical characteristics of the individual.

### 2. **Patient**

> The `Patient` model represents how an external system defines a person within a specific healthcare record. Each `Patient`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Patient` model represents record-level demographic information as provided by an external system. Each `Patient`:
```

    Patient {
        bigint id PK "Primary Key (auto-generated)"
        bigint person_id FK "Foreign Key to Person"
        json data "Patient Data"
        uuid reference_id "Reference UUID (auto-generated)"
        string external_patient_id "External Patient ID"
        string external_person_id "External Person ID"

>         string external_person_source "Source System"

Reviewer: Should we keep this as External Source System just so it matches "External Patient ID" and "External Person ID"? I can see it going both ways, where 'external' might be an odd way to refer to a surveillance system (for example). I don't have particularly strong feelings on this one, just wanted to double check.

```

> **Design Note**: Both the `Person` and `Patient` models include two identifiers: an `INT id` and a `UUID reference_id`. While either could serve as the primary key, using both offers performance and security benefits at the cost of some additional storage. The `INT id` is designated as the primary key because of its compact size, which makes it more efficient for indexing and join operations. However, exposing sequential integer IDs externally can pose a security risk by making it easier to infer the number of records in the database. To mitigate this, the `UUID reference_id` serves as a secure, external-facing identifier. It enables safe referencing of records without revealing internal record counts or sequences. In short, the `INT id` is optimized for internal performance, while the `UUID reference_id` provides a secure external reference.

### Key Relationships Summary

| Relationship                | Description |
|-----------------------------|-------------|
| **Person → Patient**        | A person may be linked to many external `Patient` records |
| **Patient → BlockingValue** | A patient may have many `BlockingValue` entries for blocking comparisons |

> | **Algorithm (config)**      | Stores match settings and thresholds used during processing; not joined in match graphs |

Reviewer: Nice 😎
